Conversational AI Best Practices (#8061)
mendix/docs: content/en/docs/howto/front-end/conversation-best-practices.md

---
title: "Conversational AI Design Checklist"
url: /howto/front-end/conversation-checklist/
linktitle: "Conversation Checklist"
weight: 70
description: "Describes the best practices to designing Conversational AI Bots."
---

## 1 Introduction {#introduction}

Conversational AIs are easy to create, but you want them to be easy to use and reflect the ethos of your business. Creating conversational AIs is different from designing traditional user interfaces and there are aspects that you may not have come across before.

To help you, Mendix has come up with this conversational AI design checklist which helps you think about how you want end-users to perceive and use the conversational AI. It is meant as an inspiration rather than a template. There are no references to specific Mendix features or modules to help you with your design, but these will be added to the Mendix offering as Mendix integrates more conversational AI features into its offering.

In the examples below, we have named the conversational AI "Bot".

### 1.1 Key Design Elements

> Mendix suggests that you set up a Conversational AI service blueprint. This is a journey map for main user groups. It will contain the following design elements:

Author: What do you mean by "main user groups"?

Reviewer: The main user group(s) mean a targeted user group who will use the conversational AI. For example, in Mendix, there are developer group who will use MX chat in SP, business admins might use different conversational AI in control center in the platform. However, in this case, the customer need to cater conversational ai service blue print for their own user group to cater the tone of voice, conversational flow etc.

* a distinctive personality
* a specific tone and voice
* a consistent sound, feel, and behavior

### 1.2 Conversational AI Behavior Design

Mendix recommends giving your conversational AI the following behavior. Click each item to find out more.

#### 1.2.1 It Has a Warm Start and Welcomes End-Users

* [It says hi](#hi)
* [It tailors greetings to different end-users](#greeting)
* [It shows the value of the system/service and tries to match the end-user’s expectations](#value)
* [It proactively assures the end-user about data protection](#privacy)

#### 1.2.2 It Helps the End-User Feel In Control

* [The end-user can stop the AI response while it is being generated](#local-control)
* [The end-user can format the prompt at the beginning](#input)

> * [The end-user can set the temperature](#value)

Author: I don't understand these features.
If I'm building conversational AI into my app, I want to be in control of the initial prompt - I don't want the user to be able to change my ChatBot to "respond as inaccurately and humorously as possible" when I want "respond accurately, using precise language".
Also, I don't want the end-user to fiddle with the temperature - if I know that a temperature of 0.2 gives consistently good results, I don't want them to change it to 0.8 to get more variability.

Reviewer: Line 39: In general UX, all the systems need to give the user a feeling of control not control or trap the user in certain tasks. As you see in the visual example, one of the examples is 'disable text filed' and forcing the user to select one of the options. This is in general violating human-computer interaction principles, especially user control.  
Line 40: The temperature setting is common in conversational AI, you can find our AMA as well as Google Gemini and openAI.

> * [The end-user can remove the interaction history](#local-control)

Author: ```suggestion
* [The end-user can remove the interaction history](#privacy)
```
This is described in section 5

Reviewer: I don't get these points.

* **Resuming interrupted task**: Consider the context of the previous interaction, especially for returning end-users.

Don’t overwhelm the end-user with lots of details upfront.

### 3.3 Examples

* Greet and explain the system status to the novice end-user.

    {{< figure src="/attachments/howto/front-end/conversation-best-practices/bot-is-experiment.png" max-width="320px" alt="A pop-up explaining what Bot is." >}}

* For recurring end-users.

    {{< figure src="/attachments/howto/front-end/conversation-best-practices/bot-recurring.png" max-width="480px" alt="Recurring end-users get straight to bot with some suggestions and an offer to start asking questions" >}}

## 4 Determining Value{#value}

### 4.1 Why It Matters

You should help end-users to determine the value of the AI feature. Designers can help end-users understand where AI adds value and help them interact with the right expectations.

### 4.2 How We Do It

* When confronting a new system, the end-user will have these unspoken questions:

    * What is it?
    * What can it do for me?
    * Why should I care?
    * How should I feel about it?
    * Why should I trust it?
    * What does it want me to do next?

> * **System version**: Help end-users understand the capabilities and limitations of the system, setting appropriate expectations for their experience.

Author: Don't really understand this point - I don't see how communicating a version does this.

Reviewer: It isn't an explicit system version, as v1, or v2, but any type of system update count. Such as beta version or experiment version. If the system mentions system status, it helps the user understand system capabilities and features. Overall able to manage user's expectations.

Reviewer 2: I can rephrase to "**System status or version**: Help end-users understand the capabilities and limitations of the system, setting appropriate expectations for their experience. For example, let the user know if the system is in beta."

Reviewer: That sound good. Thank you @dbreseman

* Communicate the version of the system, allowing the end-user to determine the system limitation.

    {{< figure src="/attachments/howto/front-end/conversation-best-practices/upgraded-recommendations.png" max-width="320px" alt="Pop-up informing that new features are available" >}}

## 5 Assuring Privacy and Security{#privacy}

### 5.1 Why It Matters

Users seek trust and assurance that their personal information is handled securely by AI systems. Therefore, confidentiality, breach prevention, and end-user trust are vital aspects of AI system security. Our ethical duty is to protect end-user data from any incident.

### 5.2 How We Do It

* **Transparent Data Handling**: Interfaces should clearly communicate how data is collected, processed, and used.
* **Empower End-User Control**: Allow end-users to customize privacy settings and manage their data.

### 5.3 Examples

* Proactively protect end-users' personal and corporate data.

    {{< figure src="/attachments/howto/front-end/conversation-best-practices/data-is-protected.png" max-width="320px" alt="Indicate that data is protected" >}}

> * Allow the end-user to delete the conversation history, and turn off collecting the conversation.

Author: This seems to be counter to a conversational AI. The whole point of conversational AI is that it is a conversation and the AI knows what has gone on before. By turning the history off, you no longer have a conversation, just a one-shot question and answer.

Reviewer: It is general converstional AI feature, that help user to review their conversational history.
Conversation and conversational history are different.
Please try to find similar features from OpenAI, Gemini and Bing. Our AMA also has a history removal feature.

    {{< figure src="/attachments/howto/front-end/conversation-best-practices/delete-conversation.png" max-width="320px" alt="Show a switch to turn activity history on and off" >}}

## 6 Giving Local Control{#local-control}

### 6.1 Why It Matters

Local control allows end-users to adapt the AI's suggestions or outputs to their situation. 
Additionally, people are more motivated and engaged when they believe they can influence outcomes (Self-efficiency). Offering end-user control options reinforces a end-user's sense of self-efficacy and motivates them to interact with the AI system.

### 6.2 How We Do It

* **Default option**: Set defaults based on end-user research and common use cases. Offer a clear "reset to defaults" option for end-users who want to return to the original settings.
* **Discoverability**: Place local control options within clear context, near the feature they impact. Use intuitive icons and labels. Offer tooltips or contextual help for advanced settings.

### 6.3 Examples

* Provide the end-user the ability to override AI action via editing the prompt.

>     {{< figure src="/attachments/howto/front-end/conversation-best-practices/cancel-button.png" max-width="320px" alt="Show a button to allow end-user to edit a prompt" >}}

Author: I don't really understand this example. If the AI can't create a visual image what is the benefit of being able to change the original prompt?

In addition, I don't think a product containing conversational AI should allow the end-user to "override the AI action". The app designer knows what the AI is allowed, and not allowed, to do.

Reviewer: 'Override the AI action' is critically important in AI-human interaction that human can maintain overall power of control the system. Particularly important AI can make biased suggestion and decision. 
In coversational AI, there's also a feature that user can rewrite the prompt, in this case it can help user to save time from re-writing completely new prompt. Help the user's metacognition to rewrite better prompts based on generated output.

Reviewer 2: I'll reword "Provide the end-user the ability to override AI action via editing the prompt." to "Make it easy for the end-user to edit a previous prompt to generate a new response."

* Provide an option to pause the AI interaction.

    {{< figure src="/attachments/howto/front-end/conversation-best-practices/pause.png" max-width="320px" alt="Show a switch to pause current interaction" >}}

* Provide options to select a response within the interaction without the end-user having to rewrite a new prompt.

    {{< figure src="/attachments/howto/front-end/conversation-best-practices/regenerate.png" max-width="320px" alt="Allow end-user to select a previous prompt and generate new responses from it" >}}

## 7 Creating Input Mechanism{#input}

### 7.1 Why It Matters

> This is the method for the end-user to provide information to the system. This can be through text, voice, buttons, menus, or a combination of these elements. However, it is always important for the end-user to feel free to facilitate the input, especially primary input, which should always be available. 

Author: What do you mean by "facilitate the input"?

Reviewer: provide input. 
In human computer interaction, there's always human side of input and computer side of output.
Facilitate input is literally the user is providing input to the system.

Reviewer 2: > However, it is always important for the end-user to feel free to facilitate the input, especially primary input, which should always be available.

Could this be simplified to "Regardless of the input mechanism, the end-user should always have a way to provide input to the system."

Reviewer: it isn't just any input. the primary input should be the text input in the conversational interface and that shouldn't be block or disabled by any means.

### 7.2 How We Do It

> * Clear affordance is key to where the end-user can enter their input.

Author: What do you mean by "clear affordance"

Reviewer: please see "https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Affordance"

Reviewer: Affordance is environment. So the user can sense the interaction cue by seeing or capturing information (whatever the form is) surrounded in the environment. For example, by seeing a door handle, you know how to operate the door.

Reviewer 2: Can this bullet be simplified to "Make it clear where the end-user can enter their input."?

Reviewer: Affordance is well known vocabulary for human-computer interaction.
we can rephrase "Users must easily perceive where to provide input, whether it's text, a button, or another form element."

* Provide feedback once the system receives the end-user’s input to verify the system understood the input correctly.

> * Don’t overload various inputs at the same time, it might confuse the end-user with which action to take.

Author: Not sure what you mean here.

Reviewer: ah...
So feedback is the basic human-computer interaction.
The user provides input, and the system provides feedback that the system received the user's input.
Such as, if the user clicks a button, then the system privdes visual feedback (change the button color) as the user input (click) is recognized by the system.

Reviewer 2: > Don’t overload various inputs at the same time, it might confuse the end-user with which action to take.

Could this bullet point be rephrased to "Don't overwhelm the end-user with too many input options at once. Keep it simple or provide just-in-time input options to avoid confusing the end-user about which action they should take."?

Reviewer: Sound good. Thank you @dbreseman

> * Allow the end-user to input free text, or initiate a conversation.

Author: Isn't "free text" and "a conversation" the same thing?

Reviewer: Not same.
as you see the example, some system disable the input field.

Reviewer 2: I'll rephrase to "Allow the end-user initiate a conversation by using suggested topics or inputting free text."

Reviewer: Yes, perfect!

### 7.3 Example

* Provide inputs of both command buttons and free text for the end-user to navigate the conversation.

    {{< figure src="/attachments/howto/front-end/conversation-best-practices/buttons-and-prompts.png" max-width="320px" alt="Suggested questions on buttons and also a text input field" >}}

## 8 Prompting{#prompting}

### 8.1 Why It Matters

A helpful prompt guide bridges the gap between what end-users want and what the AI can understand. Eventually,it provides better AI responses for end-users.

### 8.2 How We Do It

* **AI Response Temperature**: Putting end-users in Control

>     * Empower end-users with adjustable "temperature" settings for AI responses. This could range from factual and concise to creative and elaborate, allowing end-users to customize the level of detail and personality they desire.

Author: I don't think this is appropriate in a production app, only in a "playground" where end-users are evaluating conversational AI for their own use. In a production app, the designer needs to know how consistent the responses are going to be.

Reviewer: You mean temperature setting?
Please use professional conversational AI from all major tech. Temperature setting is general feature that the user can set the response creativeness. Also, there's a trend of custom instruction.

* **Shielding End-User Data**: Proactive Protection

>     * Move beyond reactive measures. Design systems that prioritize end-user privacy from the outset. Implement robust data encryption and access controls to safeguard end-user information.

Author: Are we talking about what the end-user gives as a prompt here, not the resources the AI is using to respond to the prompt?

* **Managing End-User Input**: Set Clear Expectations,

> * **Input Character Handling**: Set realistic expectations for end-user input.

Author: Is this just one point, rather than two?

Reviewer: so?

Reviewer 2: @Ichigoko Is it okay to combine these two bullet points into a single one?

Reviewer: Yes that's fine :)

* **Precision**: Replying to specific parts allows for more precise addressing of questions or comments, ensuring relevance.
* **Organization**: Quoting and re-prompting helps organize conversations, separating topics into distinct threads for easier follow-up.
* **Efficiency**: Referencing previous messages enables focused exchanges, covering multiple topics efficiently within the same conversation.

### 9.2 How We Do It

* **Visibility and Accessibility**: Make the quote-re-prompt feature easily accessible and visible within the interface. End-users should be able to select and quote specific parts of messages intuitively, without difficulty.
* **Clarity and Readability**: Ensure quoted text is displayed clearly and legibly, distinguishing it from the end-user’s input. Use visual cues such as indentation, color, or formatting to differentiate quoted text from new messages.
* **Interactivity**: Design the quote-re-prompt feature to be interactive and responsive. Allow end-users to click or tap on quoted text to expand or collapse it, providing a seamless way to view the context without cluttering the interface.

### 9.3 Examples

> * Use a salient discoverability of the functionality.

Reviewer 2: I don't understand what this means. Could you clarify please?

Reviewer: 8.3 examples are 
8.3.1 about "prompt example" that normally displays inside of the input field. 
8.3.2 prompt example is catered for expert users, showcasing that a more granular or specific prompt can be possible.
8.3.3 showcasing ready to use prompts as chips displayed on top of the input field so that the user can simply click and use.

9. Displaying history: this seems massed up. the contents are "Quote and Re-prompt" but the title is completely different. Please refer my confluence page, it has original text.

Reviewer 2: @Ichigoko I've reverted the title to match the Confluence page. Could you help me understand what is meant by "Use a salient discoverability of the functionality."? This is a caption in one of the examples on the Confluence page: https://mendix.atlassian.net/wiki/x/3wCurw.

Reviewer: Yes, discoverability or hints shouldn't overwhelm a visual presence that distracts the user's main task. We can rephrase like this "Functionality should be discoverable without overwhelming the interface. or,
Hints should guide users without distracting from the main task."

>     {{< figure src="/attachments/howto/front-end/conversation-best-practices/reply-quote-icon.png" max-width="320px" alt="Showing an icon in the Bot response to indicate a response is required" >}}

Author: I'm not sure what the use of this is. When the Bot stops responding it is always the end-user's turn to prompt - the bot will not spontaneously start responding after a set length of time.

It is not clear that the reply function will only pick up part of the bot's response.

Reviewer: There are various interactions between the user and the conversational system. if their primary interaction is based on the user's prompt and system response, there are also quotes and re-prompt. Effective re-pompting helps users save time and the system to have a better context of understanding the user's intent.

* Make the selected quote visible in the input area and ensure the end-user can disable it if it is no longer needed.

    {{< figure src="/attachments/howto/front-end/conversation-best-practices/highlight-the-question.png" max-width="320px" alt="Summarize the Bot's question near the prompt" >}}

## 10 Hinting and Discoverability{#hinting}

### 10.1 Why It Matters

> With conversational AI, the burden of discovering the capability of a bot or voice assistants is up to the end-user. They can only know a chatbot can’t do something after it fails to provide a good response. If there are no hints or affordances, end-users are more likely to have unrealistic expectations.

Author: What do you mean by "affordances"?

Reviewer: I've commented previous question regarding affordance.

Reviewer 2: Is it okay to rephrase this to "hints or interface cues" to help keep this understandable to a wide range of readers?

Reviewer: Yes. sound good. thank you!

### 10.2 How We Do It

* **Visual Cues**: Incorporating visual indicators or icons to signify AI-driven features or suggestions can help end-users identify and interact with AI elements more easily.
* **Onboarding Tutorials**: Providing guided onboarding tutorials or tooltips that introduce end-users to AI functionalities can enhance discoverability and encourage exploration.
* **Contextual Help**: Offering contextual help prompts or pop-ups that appear when end-users encounter AI features for the first time can help them to utilize these features effectively.
* **Predictive Suggestions**: Implementing predictive suggestions or autocomplete features powered by AI algorithms can help end-users anticipate system responses and discover new functionalities.
* **Progressive Disclosure**: Employing progressive disclosure techniques to gradually reveal AI capabilities as end-users interact with the system can avoid overwhelming end-users with too much information upfront while encouraging exploration over time.
* **Action-oriented**: Always provide end-users with the next action to take.

> * **Serendipity**: Algorithmic recommendations can create filter bubbles. Adding serendipity helps end-users discover new things outside their echo chambers.

Author: What do you mean by serendipity. Is it the same as temperature?

Reviewer: Yes similar.

Reviewer 2: @Ichigoko Is it okay to use "temperature" here instead of "serendipity" then, to avoid introducing a new term that the reader may not understand?

Reviewer: Let's remove the serendifity line completely, if it is confusing. 
Serendifity is more discoverability, whereas temperature setting is the level of precision & creativity of the responce.

### 10.3 Examples

* When text is highlighted, the modification icon appears, signaling an opportunity for further interaction.

    {{< figure src="/attachments/howto/front-end/conversation-best-practices/modify-icon.png" max-width="320px" alt="Modify icon appears near highlighted response from Bot" >}}

* After hitting the modify icon the end-user can discover modification options.

    {{< figure src="/attachments/howto/front-end/conversation-best-practices/modify-options.png" max-width="320px" alt="Some standard modify options (Regenerate, Make Shorter, Remove) are given next to Bot's response" >}}

* The end-user can discover options to "Show drafts" or "Hide drafts" of the generated text.

>     {{< figure src="/attachments/howto/front-end/conversation-best-practices/drafts.png" max-width="320px" alt="Option is given to create multiple drafts of response from Bot with option to show or hide the Bot's responses" >}}

Author: I'm not sure what this has to do with hinting and discoverability. In fact, the "drafts" functionality is completely unclear to me - are we forcing the AI to make some of its reasoning steps explicit? How does that help the end-user?

I'm not sure this sort of bot interaction is relevant to our customers, they might as well use a public interface to ChatGPT if they want to generate haikus about coffee.

Reviewer: draft functionality is proactive ai responces that user can select one of the versions of ai responses.

Reviewer 2: I'll rephrase to "The end-user can discover options to show or hide a few drafts of the generated text and then select their preferred version."

Reviewer: Thank you!

## 11 Reporting Errors{#errors}

### 11.1 Why It Matters

Transparent error messages tell end-users exactly what went wrong, preventing confusion and wasted time trying to guess the issue. By explaining the problem, end-users can identify the solution or take appropriate corrective actions easily.

### 11.2 How We Do It

* **Use precise language**: Instead of "An error occurred," pinpoint the issue. For example, "We couldn't find a profile with that email address. Please check your spelling and try again."

> * **Offer context**: Briefly explain why the error happened. For instance, "The password you entered doesn't meet our security requirements. It must be at least 8 characters long and contain a combination of uppercase and lowercase letters, numbers, and symbols."

Author: I'm not sure I would rely on a chatbot to implement a security requirement - this is something which is much better done in deterministic code.

Reviewer: this is "context". The baseline here is helpful guidance to the user side of the error.
